CPU Registers
To perform efficient code execution,
the CPU maintains and uses a series
of nine 32-bit registers.
Registers are small, extremely
high-speed CPU storage locations
where data can be efficiently
read or manipulated.
The register names were established
for 16-bit architectures
and were then extended with
the advent of the 32-bit platform,
hence the letter “E” in the
register’s acronym.
Each register may contain a 32-bit value
or may contain 16-bit or 8-bit values
in the respective subregisters as shown
in this example for the EAX register.
Since the purpose of this module
is to demonstrate a buffer overflow,
we will not delve into the details
of assembly, but will highlight
some of the elements that are
important to our specific discussion.
For more detail, or to advance beyond
the basic techniques discussed here,
refer to the online resources
in your lab guide
General Purpose Registers
Several registers are often used
as general purpose registers
to store temporary data.
There is much more to this discussion,
but the primary registers
for our purposes are:
EAX, which is the accumulator and is used
for arithmetical and logical instructions,
EBX, the base pointer for
memory addresses,
ECX, the count register, which is used as
a loop, shift, and rotation counter,
EDX, used for I/O port addressing,
multiplication, and division,
ESI, the source index
used as a pointer addressing the
data source in string copy operations,
and EDI, which is the destination index
used as a pointer addressing the
desination memory buffer
in string copy operations.
ESP, EBP, and EIP
As we’ve mentioned, the stack
is used for storage of data,
pointers, and arguments.
Since the stack is dynamic and changes
constantly during program execution,
ESP, the stack pointer, keeps track of
the most recently referenced location
on the stack by storing
a pointer to it.
A pointer is a reference to an
address, or location, in memory.
When we say a register stores a
pointer or points to an address,
this essentially means that the
register is storing that target address.
Since the stack is in constant flux
during the execution of a thread,
it can become difficult for a function
to locate its own stack frame,
which stores the required arguments,
local variables, and the return address.
EBP, the base pointer,
solves this by storing a pointer to the
top of the stack when a function is called
By accessing EBP,
a function can easily reference
information from its own stack frame,
via offsets, while executing.
EIP, the instruction pointer,
is one of the most important
registers for our purposes
as it always points to the
next code instruction to be executed.
Since EIP essentially directs
the flow of a program,
it is an attacker’s primary target
when exploiting any memory corruption
vulnerability such as a buffer overflow.